containers/rocm/README.md, before:

# InstructLab toolbox container for AMD ROCm GPUs

The ROCm container file is designed for AMD GPUs with RDNA3 architecture (`gfx1100`). The container can be build for RDNA2 (`gfx1030`) and older GPUs, too. Please refer to [AMD's system requirements](https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/install-on-linux/en/develop/reference/system-requirements.html) for a list of officially supported cards. ROCm is known to work on more consumer GPUs.

The container file creates a [toolbox](https://github.com/containers/toolbox) container for [`toolbox(1)`](https://www.mankier.com/1/toolbox) command line tool. A toolbox containers has seamless access to the entire system including user's home directory, networking, hardware, SSH agent, and more.

The container has all Python dependencies installed in a virtual env. The virtual env is already activated when you enter the container.

## Quick start

1. git clone the `instructlab` and `taxonomy` project into a common folder in your
   home directory (e.g. `~/path/to/instructlab`)
2. add your account to `render` and `video` group: `sudo usermod -a -G render,video $LOGNAME`
3. install build dependency for this container: `sudo dnf install toolbox podman make rocminfo`
4. build the container: `make rocm` or `make rocm-gfx1100`
5. create a toolbox `make rocm-toolbox`
6. enter toolbox `toolbox enter instructlab`. The container has your
   home directory mounted.

To update InstructLab CLI to latest version: `pip install -e ~/path/to/instructlab/instructlab`

`ilab generate` and `ilab chat` use the GPU automatically. `ilab train` needs
more powerful and recent GPU and therefore does not use GPU by default. To
train on a GPU, run `ilab train --device cuda`.


## Building for other GPU architectures

Use the `amdgpu-arch` or `rocminfo` tool to get the short name

```shell
dnf install clang-tools-extra rocminfo
amdgpu-arch
rocminfo | grep gfx
```

Map the name to a LLVM GPU target and an override GFX version. PyTorch 2.2.1+rocm5.7 provides a limited set of `rocBLAS` Kernels. Fedora 40's ROCm packages have more Kernels. For now we are limited to what PyTorch binaries provide until Fedora ships `python-torch` with ROCm support.

| Name      | XNACK/USM | Version  | PyTorch | Fedora |
|-----------|-----------|----------|:-------:|:------:|
| `gfx900`  |           | `9.0.0`  | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx906`  | `xnack-`  | `9.0.6`  | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx908`  | `xnack-`  | `9.0.8`  | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx90a`  | `xnack-`  | `9.0.10` | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx90a`  | `xnack+`  | `9.0.10` | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx940`  |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx941`  |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx942`  |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx1010` |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx1012` |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx1030` |           | `10.3.0` | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx1100` |           | `11.0.0` | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx1101` |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx1102` |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |

If your card is not listed or unsupported, try the closest smaller value, e.g. for `gfx1031` use target `gfx1030` and override `10.3.0`. See [`ROCm/ROCR-Runtime` `isa.cpp`](https://github.com/ROCm/ROCR-Runtime/blob/rocm-6.0.2/src/core/runtime/isa.cpp#L245) and [LLVM User Guide for AMDGPU](https://llvm.org/docs/AMDGPUUsage.html#processors) for more information.

| Marketing Name         | Name      | Arch  | Target    | GFX version | Memory | Chat | Train |
|------------------------|-----------|-------|-----------|-------------|--------|:----:|:-----:|
| AMD Radeon RX 7900 XT  | `gfx1100` | RDNA3 | `gfx1100` | `11.0.0`    | 20 GiB | ✅   | ✅    |
| AMD Radeon RX 7900 XTX |           | RDNA3 |           |             | 24 GiB | ✅   | ✅    |
| AMD Radeon RX 6700     | `gfx1031` | RDNA2 | `gfx1030` | `10.3.0`    | 10 GiB | ✅   | ❌    |

Build the container with additional build arguments:

```shell
make rocm-gfx1100 BUILD_ARGS=
```

## Known issues

AMD Instinct MI210 with ISA `amdgcn-amd-amdhsa--gfx90a:sramecc+:xnack-` is not supported by Fedora build `rocblas-6.0.2-3`. As of late April 2024, Fedora has `gfx90a:xnack+` and `gfx90a:xnack-` but lacks `gfx90a:sramecc+:xnack-`.

Commit message:

AMD ROCm 6.0 container on RHEL ubi9-python311
The new `ubi9-rocm` container file is based on Red Hat's Universal Base
Image for RHEL 9. It uses AMD's upstream ROCm 6.0 repositories for ROCm
libraries and tool chain.

The container is not yet optimized for size. It comes with all AMD GPU
Kernels and supports all ISAs that are supported by PyTorch and ROCm.

I have successfully tested the image on my AMD Radeon 7900 XT GPU.

Signed-off-by: Christian Heimes <cheimes@redhat.com>

containers/rocm/README.md, after:

# InstructLab toolbox container for AMD ROCm GPUs

The ROCm container file is designed for AMD GPUs with RDNA3 architecture (`gfx1100`). The container can be build for RDNA2 (`gfx1030`) and older GPUs, too. Please refer to [AMD's system requirements](https://rocm.docs.amd.com/projects/install-on-linux/en/develop/reference/system-requirements.html) for a list of officially supported cards. ROCm is known to work on more consumer GPUs.

The container file creates a [toolbox](https://github.com/containers/toolbox) container for [`toolbox(1)`](https://www.mankier.com/1/toolbox) command line tool. A toolbox containers has seamless access to the entire system including user's home directory, networking, hardware, SSH agent, and more.

The container has all Python dependencies installed in a virtual env. The virtual env is already activated when you enter the container.

## Quick start

1. git clone the `instructlab` and `taxonomy` project into a common folder in your
   home directory (e.g. `~/path/to/instructlab`)
2. add your account to `render` and `video` group: `sudo usermod -a -G render,video $LOGNAME`
3. install build dependency for this container: `sudo dnf install toolbox podman make rocminfo`
4. build the container: `make rocm` or `make rocm-gfx1100`
5. create a toolbox `make rocm-toolbox`
6. enter toolbox `toolbox enter instructlab`. The container has your
   home directory mounted.

To update InstructLab CLI to latest version: `pip install -e ~/path/to/instructlab/instructlab`

`ilab generate` and `ilab chat` use the GPU automatically. `ilab train` needs
more powerful and recent GPU and therefore does not use GPU by default. To
train on a GPU, run `ilab train --device cuda`.


## Building for other GPU architectures

Use the `amdgpu-arch` or `rocminfo` tool to get the short name

```shell
dnf install clang-tools-extra rocminfo
amdgpu-arch
rocminfo | grep gfx
```

Map the name to a LLVM GPU target and an override GFX version. PyTorch 2.2.1+rocm5.7 provides a limited set of `rocBLAS` Kernels. Fedora 40's ROCm packages have more Kernels. For now we are limited to what PyTorch binaries provide until Fedora ships `python-torch` with ROCm support.

| Name      | XNACK/USM | Version  | PyTorch | Fedora |
|-----------|-----------|----------|:-------:|:------:|
| `gfx900`  |           | `9.0.0`  | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx906`  | `xnack-`  | `9.0.6`  | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx908`  | `xnack-`  | `9.0.8`  | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx90a`  | `xnack-`  | `9.0.10` | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx90a`  | `xnack+`  | `9.0.10` | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx940`  |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx941`  |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx942`  |           |          | ⚠️ (6.0)| ✅     |
| `gfx1010` |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx1012` |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx1030` |           | `10.3.0` | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx1100` |           | `11.0.0` | ✅      | ✅     |
| `gfx1101` |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |
| `gfx1102` |           |          | ❌      | ✅     |

If your card is not listed or unsupported, try the closest smaller value, e.g. for `gfx1031` use target `gfx1030` and override `10.3.0`. See [`ROCm/ROCR-Runtime` `isa.cpp`](https://github.com/ROCm/ROCR-Runtime/blob/rocm-6.0.2/src/core/runtime/isa.cpp#L245) and [LLVM User Guide for AMDGPU](https://llvm.org/docs/AMDGPUUsage.html#processors) for more information.

| Marketing Name         | Name      | Arch  | Target    | GFX version | Memory | Chat | Train |
|------------------------|-----------|-------|-----------|-------------|--------|:----:|:-----:|
| AMD Radeon RX 7900 XT  | `gfx1100` | RDNA3 | `gfx1100` | `11.0.0`    | 20 GiB | ✅   | ✅    |
| AMD Radeon RX 7900 XTX |           | RDNA3 |           |             | 24 GiB | ✅   | ✅    |
| AMD Radeon RX 6700     | `gfx1031` | RDNA2 | `gfx1030` | `10.3.0`    | 10 GiB | ✅   | ❌    |

Build the container with additional build arguments:

```shell
make rocm-gfx1100 BUILD_ARGS=
```

## Known issues

AMD Instinct MI210 with ISA `amdgcn-amd-amdhsa--gfx90a:sramecc+:xnack-` is not supported by Fedora build `rocblas-6.0.2-3`. As of late April 2024, Fedora has `gfx90a:xnack+` and `gfx90a:xnack-` but lacks `gfx90a:sramecc+:xnack-`.

## UBI 9 image

The ROCm UBI9 image is based on `ubi9-python311` and uses AMD's ROCm repository. The container file requires a Red Hat subscription to build. A [No-cost RHEL Individual Developer Subscription](https://developers.redhat.com/articles/faqs-no-cost-red-hat-enterprise-linux) is sufficient. On Fedora, `subscription-manager` and `subscription-manager-plugin-container` must be installed and the host system must be registered.

The resulting container image is rather large, because it contains Kernels for all supported AMD GPU ISAs and comes with ROCm's LLVM / clang stack. Currently the image is about 26 GB on disk.

Register host:
```shell
sudo dnf install subscription-manager subscription-manager-plugin-container
sudo subscription-manager register ...
```

Build image:
```shell
make ubi9-rocm BUILD_ARGS=
```

Run image:
```shell
mkdir -p src
podman run -v./data:/opt/app-root/src:z --device /dev/dri --device /dev/kfd -ti --rm localhost/instructlab:ubi9-rocm
(app-root) ilab init
(app-root) ilab download
(app-root) ilab chat
```
