#
# This file is autogenerated by pip-compile with Python 3.12
# by the following command:
#
#    pip-compile --output-file=constraints-dev.txt requirements.txt
#
absl-py==2.2.2
    # via rouge-score
accelerate==1.6.0
    # via
    #   instructlab-eval
    #   lm-eval
    #   peft
    #   trl
aiofiles==24.1.0
    # via instructlab-training
aiohappyeyeballs==2.6.1
    # via aiohttp
aiohttp==3.11.18
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   fsspec
    #   langchain-community
aiosignal==1.3.2
    # via aiohttp
annotated-types==0.7.0
    # via pydantic
anyio==4.9.0
    # via
    #   httpx
    #   openai
    #   sse-starlette
    #   starlette
appdirs==1.4.4
    # via ragas
attrs==25.3.0
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   jsonlines
    #   jsonschema
    #   referencing
backoff==2.2.1
    # via posthog
beautifulsoup4==4.13.4
    # via docling
boto3==1.38.7
    # via -r requirements.txt
botocore==1.38.7
    # via
    #   boto3
    #   s3transfer
certifi==2025.4.26
    # via
    #   docling
    #   httpcore
    #   httpx
    #   requests
    #   sentry-sdk
chardet==5.2.0
    # via mbstrdecoder
charset-normalizer==3.4.1
    # via requests
click==8.1.8
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   click-didyoumean
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   nltk
    #   typer
    #   uvicorn
    #   wandb
click-didyoumean==0.3.1
    # via -r requirements.txt
colorama==0.4.6
    # via
    #   sacrebleu
    #   tqdm-multiprocess
contourpy==1.3.2
    # via matplotlib
cycler==0.12.1
    # via matplotlib
dataclasses-json==0.6.7
    # via langchain-community
dataproperty==1.1.0
    # via
    #   pytablewriter
    #   tabledata
datasets==3.5.1
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   evaluate
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   instructlab-training
    #   lm-eval
    #   ragas
    #   trl
dill==0.3.8
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   lm-eval
    #   multiprocess
diskcache==5.6.3
    # via
    #   llama-cpp-python
    #   ragas
distro==1.9.0
    # via
    #   openai
    #   posthog
docker-pycreds==0.4.0
    # via wandb
docling==2.31.0
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   instructlab-sdg
docling-core[chunking]==2.29.0
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   docling
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   docling-parse
    #   instructlab-sdg
docling-ibm-models==3.4.2
    # via docling
docling-parse==4.0.1
    # via docling
easyocr==1.7.2
    # via docling
et-xmlfile==2.0.0
    # via openpyxl
evaluate==0.4.3
    # via lm-eval
fastapi==0.115.12
    # via llama-cpp-python
filelock==3.18.0
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   datasets
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   torch
    #   transformers
filetype==1.2.0
    # via docling
fonttools==4.57.0
    # via matplotlib
frozenlist==1.6.0
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   aiosignal
fsspec[http]==2025.3.0
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   torch
gguf==0.16.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   instructlab-sdg
gitdb==4.0.12
    # via gitpython
gitpython==3.1.44
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   instructlab-eval
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   wandb
h11==0.16.0
    # via
    #   httpcore
    #   uvicorn
h5py==3.13.0
    # via instructlab-sdg
haystack-ai==2.13.1
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   haystack-experimental
haystack-experimental==0.9.0
    # via haystack-ai
hf-transfer==0.1.9
    # via huggingface-hub
httpcore==1.0.9
    # via httpx
httpx==0.28.1
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   instructlab-eval
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   langsmith
    #   openai
httpx-sse==0.4.0
    # via langchain-community
huggingface-hub[hf-transfer]==0.30.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   accelerate
    #   datasets
    #   docling
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   evaluate
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   peft
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   tokenizers
    #   transformers
idna==3.10
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   httpx
    #   requests
    #   yarl
imageio==2.37.0
    # via scikit-image
instructlab-dolomite==0.2.0
    # via instructlab-training
instructlab-eval==0.6.0
    # via -r requirements.txt
instructlab-quantize==0.1.0
    # via -r requirements.txt
instructlab-schema==0.4.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   instructlab-sdg
instructlab-sdg==0.8.2
    # via -r requirements.txt
instructlab-training==0.10.2
    # via -r requirements.txt
jinja2==3.1.6
    # via
    #   haystack-ai
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   llama-cpp-python
    #   torch
jiter==0.9.0
    # via openai
jmespath==1.0.1
    # via
    #   boto3
    #   botocore
joblib==1.4.2
    # via
    #   nltk
    #   scikit-learn
    #   submodlib-py
jsonlines==3.1.0
    # via
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   lm-eval
jsonpatch==1.33
    # via langchain-core
jsonpointer==3.0.0
    # via jsonpatch
jsonref==1.1.0
    # via docling-core
jsonschema==4.23.0
    # via
    #   docling-core
    #   haystack-ai
    #   instructlab-schema
jsonschema-specifications==2025.4.1
    # via jsonschema
kiwisolver==1.4.8
    # via matplotlib
langchain==0.3.24
    # via
    #   langchain-community
    #   ragas
langchain-community==0.3.23
    # via ragas
langchain-core==0.3.56
    # via
    #   langchain
    #   langchain-community
    #   langchain-openai
    #   langchain-text-splitters
    #   ragas
langchain-openai==0.3.15
    # via ragas
langchain-text-splitters==0.3.8
    # via
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   langchain
langsmith==0.3.39
    # via
    #   langchain
    #   langchain-community
    #   langchain-core
latex2mathml==3.77.0
    # via docling-core
lazy-imports==0.4.0
    # via haystack-ai
lazy-loader==0.4
    # via scikit-image
llama-cpp-python[server]==0.3.6
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   llama-cpp-python
llvmlite==0.44.0
    # via numba
lm-eval==0.4.8
    # via instructlab-eval
lxml==5.4.0
    # via
    #   docling
    #   python-docx
    #   python-pptx
    #   sacrebleu
markdown-it-py==3.0.0
    # via rich
marko==2.1.3
    # via docling
markupsafe==3.0.2
    # via jinja2
marshmallow==3.26.1
    # via dataclasses-json
matplotlib==3.10.1
    # via submodlib-py
mbstrdecoder==1.1.4
    # via
    #   dataproperty
    #   pytablewriter
    #   typepy
mdurl==0.1.2
    # via markdown-it-py
mlx==0.5.1 ; sys_platform == "darwin" and platform_machine == "arm64"
    # via -r requirements.txt
more-itertools==10.7.0
    # via
    #   haystack-ai
    #   lm-eval
mpire[dill]==2.10.2
    # via semchunk
mpmath==1.3.0
    # via sympy
multidict==6.4.3
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   yarl
multiprocess==0.70.16
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   mpire
mypy-extensions==1.1.0
    # via typing-inspect
nest-asyncio==1.6.0
    # via ragas
networkx==3.4.2
    # via
    #   haystack-ai
    #   scikit-image
    #   torch
ninja==1.11.1.4
    # via easyocr
nltk==3.9.1
    # via rouge-score
numba==0.61.2
    # via
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   instructlab-training
    #   submodlib-py
numexpr==2.10.2
    # via lm-eval
numpy==1.26.4
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   accelerate
    #   contourpy
    #   datasets
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   easyocr
    #   evaluate
    #   gguf
    #   h5py
    #   haystack-ai
    #   imageio
    #   instructlab-training
    #   langchain-community
    #   llama-cpp-python
    #   matplotlib
    #   numba
    #   numexpr
    #   opencv-python-headless
    #   pandas
    #   pandas-stubs
    #   peft
    #   ragas
    #   rouge-score
    #   sacrebleu
    #   safetensors
    #   scikit-image
    #   scikit-learn
    #   scipy
    #   shapely
    #   submodlib-py
    #   tifffile
    #   torchvision
    #   transformers
openai==1.76.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   haystack-ai
    #   instructlab-eval
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   langchain-openai
    #   ragas
opencv-python-headless==4.11.0.86
    # via
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   easyocr
openpyxl==3.1.5
    # via docling
orjson==3.10.18
    # via langsmith
packaging==24.2
    # via
    #   accelerate
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   instructlab-training
    #   langchain-core
    #   langsmith
    #   lazy-loader
    #   marshmallow
    #   matplotlib
    #   peft
    #   scikit-image
    #   transformers
    #   typepy
pandas==2.2.3
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   docling
    #   docling-core
    #   evaluate
    #   instructlab-eval
    #   submodlib-py
pandas-stubs==2.2.3.250308
    # via instructlab-eval
pathspec==0.12.1
    # via yamllint
pathvalidate==3.2.3
    # via pytablewriter
peft==0.15.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   instructlab-training
    #   lm-eval
pillow==11.2.1
    # via
    #   docling
    #   docling-core
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   docling-parse
    #   easyocr
    #   imageio
    #   matplotlib
    #   python-pptx
    #   scikit-image
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   torchvision
platformdirs==4.3.7
    # via wandb
pluggy==1.5.0
    # via docling
portalocker==3.1.1
    # via sacrebleu
posthog==4.0.1
    # via haystack-ai
prompt-toolkit==3.0.51
    # via -r requirements.txt
propcache==0.3.1
    # via
    #   aiohttp
    #   yarl
protobuf==6.30.2
    # via wandb
psutil==7.0.0
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   accelerate
    #   instructlab-eval
    #   peft
    #   wandb
py-cpuinfo==9.0.0
    # via instructlab-training
pyarrow==20.0.0
    # via datasets
pybind11==2.13.6
    # via lm-eval
pyclipper==1.3.0.post6
    # via easyocr
pydantic==2.11.4
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   docling
    #   docling-core
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   docling-parse
    #   fastapi
    #   haystack-ai
    #   haystack-experimental
    #   instructlab-training
    #   langchain
    #   langchain-core
    #   langsmith
    #   openai
    #   pydantic-settings
    #   pydantic-yaml
    #   ragas
    #   wandb
pydantic-core==2.33.2
    # via pydantic
pydantic-settings==2.9.1
    # via
    #   docling
    #   langchain-community
    #   llama-cpp-python
pydantic-yaml==1.4.0
    # via -r requirements.txt
pygments==2.19.1
    # via
    #   mpire
    #   rich
pylatexenc==2.10
    # via docling
pyparsing==3.2.3
    # via matplotlib
pypdfium2==4.30.1
    # via docling
pytablewriter==1.2.1
    # via lm-eval
python-bidi==0.6.6
    # via easyocr
python-dateutil==2.9.0.post0
    # via
    #   botocore
    #   haystack-ai
    #   matplotlib
    #   pandas
    #   posthog
    #   typepy
python-docx==1.1.2
    # via docling
python-dotenv==1.1.0
    # via pydantic-settings
python-pptx==1.0.2
    # via docling
pytz==2025.2
    # via
    #   pandas
    #   typepy
pyyaml==6.0.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   accelerate
    #   datasets
    #   docling-core
    #   easyocr
    #   gguf
    #   haystack-ai
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   instructlab-schema
    #   instructlab-training
    #   langchain
    #   langchain-community
    #   langchain-core
    #   llama-cpp-python
    #   peft
    #   transformers
    #   wandb
    #   yamllint
ragas==0.2.15
    # via instructlab-eval
referencing==0.36.2
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   jsonschema-specifications
regex==2024.11.6
    # via
    #   nltk
    #   sacrebleu
    #   tiktoken
    #   transformers
requests==2.32.3
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   docling
    #   evaluate
    #   haystack-ai
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   langchain
    #   langchain-community
    #   langsmith
    #   posthog
    #   requests-toolbelt
    #   tiktoken
    #   transformers
    #   wandb
requests-toolbelt==1.0.0
    # via langsmith
rich==14.0.0
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   instructlab-training
    #   trl
    #   typer
rouge-score==0.1.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   lm-eval
rpds-py==0.24.0
    # via
    #   jsonschema
    #   referencing
rtree==1.4.0
    # via docling
ruamel-yaml==0.18.10
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   pydantic-yaml
ruamel-yaml-clib==0.2.12
    # via ruamel-yaml
s3transfer==0.12.0
    # via boto3
sacrebleu==2.5.1
    # via lm-eval
safetensors[numpy,torch]==0.5.3
    # via
    #   accelerate
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   instructlab-dolomite
    #   peft
    #   transformers
scikit-image==0.25.2
    # via easyocr
scikit-learn==1.6.1
    # via
    #   lm-eval
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   submodlib-py
scipy==1.15.2
    # via
    #   docling
    #   easyocr
    #   scikit-image
    #   scikit-learn
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   submodlib-py
semchunk==2.2.2
    # via docling-core
sentence-transformers==4.1.0
    # via -r requirements.txt
sentencepiece==0.2.0
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   gguf
    #   instructlab-sdg
sentry-sdk==2.27.0
    # via wandb
setproctitle==1.3.6
    # via wandb
shapely==2.1.0
    # via easyocr
shellingham==1.5.4
    # via typer
shortuuid==1.0.13
    # via instructlab-eval
six==1.17.0
    # via
    #   docker-pycreds
    #   posthog
    #   python-dateutil
    #   rouge-score
smmap==5.0.2
    # via gitdb
sniffio==1.3.1
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   openai
soupsieve==2.7
    # via beautifulsoup4
sqlalchemy==2.0.40
    # via
    #   langchain
    #   langchain-community
sqlitedict==2.1.0
    # via lm-eval
sse-starlette==2.3.3
    # via llama-cpp-python
starlette==0.46.2
    # via
    #   fastapi
    #   sse-starlette
    #   starlette-context
starlette-context==0.3.6
    # via llama-cpp-python
submodlib-py==0.0.2
    # via instructlab-sdg
sympy==1.14.0
    # via torch
tabledata==1.3.4
    # via pytablewriter
tabulate==0.9.0
    # via
    #   docling-core
    #   docling-parse
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   sacrebleu
tcolorpy==0.1.7
    # via pytablewriter
tenacity==9.1.2
    # via
    #   haystack-ai
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   langchain-community
    #   langchain-core
threadpoolctl==3.6.0
    # via scikit-learn
tifffile==2025.3.30
    # via scikit-image
tiktoken==0.9.0
    # via
    #   langchain-openai
    #   ragas
tokenizers==0.21.1
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   transformers
toml==0.10.2
    # via -r requirements.txt
torch==2.7.0
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   accelerate
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   easyocr
    #   instructlab-dolomite
    #   instructlab-eval
    #   instructlab-training
    #   lm-eval
    #   peft
    #   safetensors
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   torchvision
torchvision==0.22.0
    # via
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   easyocr
tqdm==4.67.1
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   datasets
    #   docling
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   evaluate
    #   gguf
    #   haystack-ai
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   mpire
    #   nltk
    #   openai
    #   peft
    #   semchunk
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   submodlib-py
    #   tqdm-multiprocess
    #   transformers
tqdm-multiprocess==0.0.11
    # via lm-eval
transformers==4.51.3
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   docling-core
    #   docling-ibm-models
    #   instructlab-dolomite
    #   instructlab-eval
    #   instructlab-sdg
    #   instructlab-training
    #   lm-eval
    #   peft
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   trl
trl==0.14.0
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   instructlab-training
typepy[datetime]==1.3.4
    # via
    #   dataproperty
    #   pytablewriter
    #   tabledata
typer==0.15.3
    # via
    #   docling
    #   docling-core
types-pytz==2025.2.0.20250326
    # via pandas-stubs
typing-extensions==4.13.2
    # via
    #   anyio
    #   beautifulsoup4
    #   docling-core
    #   fastapi
    #   haystack-ai
    #   huggingface-hub
    #   instructlab-schema
    #   langchain-core
    #   llama-cpp-python
    #   openai
    #   pydantic
    #   pydantic-core
    #   pydantic-yaml
    #   python-docx
    #   python-pptx
    #   referencing
    #   sentence-transformers
    #   sqlalchemy
    #   torch
    #   typer
    #   typing-inspect
    #   typing-inspection
    #   wandb
typing-inspect==0.9.0
    # via dataclasses-json
typing-inspection==0.4.0
    # via
    #   pydantic
    #   pydantic-settings
tzdata==2025.2
    # via pandas
urllib3==2.4.0
    # via
    #   botocore
    #   requests
    #   sentry-sdk
uvicorn==0.34.2
    # via llama-cpp-python
wandb==0.19.10
    # via -r requirements.txt
wcwidth==0.2.13
    # via prompt-toolkit
wheel==0.45.1
    # via instructlab-training
word2number==1.1
    # via lm-eval
xdg-base-dirs==6.0.2
    # via
    #   -r requirements.txt
    #   instructlab-sdg
xlsxwriter==3.2.3
    # via python-pptx
xxhash==3.5.0
    # via
    #   datasets
    #   evaluate
yamllint==1.37.0
    # via instructlab-schema
yarl==1.20.0
    # via aiohttp
zstandard==0.23.0
    # via
    #   langsmith
    #   lm-eval

# The following packages are considered to be unsafe in a requirements file:
# setuptools
