CONTRIBUTING/CONTRIBUTING.md, before:

# Contributing

👍🎉 First off, thank you for taking the time to contribute! 🎉👍

The following is a set of guidelines for contributing. These are just guidelines, not rules. Use your best judgment, and feel free to propose changes to this document in a pull request. Please read the [community contribution guide](https://github.com/instruct-lab/community/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) first for general practices for the InstructLab 🥼 community.

## What Should I Know Before I Get Started?

### Code of Conduct

This project adheres to the [Contributor Covenant](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). By participating, you are expected to uphold this code.

Please report unacceptable behavior to one of the [Code Owners](../CODEOWNERS).

### How Do I Start Contributing?

The below workflow is designed to help you begin your first contribution journey. It will guide you through creating and picking up issues, working through them, having your work reviewed, and then merging.

Help on open source projects is always welcome and there is always something that can be improved. For example, documentation (like the text you are reading now) can always use improvement, code can always be clarified, variables or functions can always be renamed or commented on, and there is always a need for more test coverage. If you see something that you think should be fixed, take ownership! Here is how you get started:

## How Can I Contribute?

When contributing, it's useful to start by looking at [issues](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues). After picking up an issue, writing code, or updating a document, make a pull request and your work will be reviewed and merged. If you're adding a new feature or find a bug, it's best to [write an issue](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=feature_request.md&title=) first to discuss it with maintainers.

To contribute to this repo, you'll use the Fork and Pull model common in many open source repositories. For details on this process, check out [The GitHub Workflow
Guide](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/github-workflow.md)
from Kubernetes.

When your contribution is ready, you can create a pull request. Pull requests are often referred to as "PR". In general, we follow the standard [GitHub pull request](https://help.github.com/en/articles/about-pull-requests) process. Follow the template to provide details about your pull request to the maintainers.

Before sending pull requests, make sure your changes pass formatting, linting and unit tests.

#### Code Review

Once you've [created a pull request](#how-can-i-contribute), maintainers will review your code and may make suggestions to fix before merging. It will be easier for your pull request to receive reviews if you consider the criteria the reviewers follow while working. Remember to:

- Run tests locally and ensure they pass
- Follow the project coding conventions
- Write detailed commit messages
- Break large changes into a logical series of smaller patches, which are easy to understand individually and combine to solve a broader issue

### Reporting Bugs

This section guides you through submitting a bug report. Following these guidelines helps maintainers and the community understand your report ✏️, reproduce the behavior 💻, and find related reports 🔎.

#### How Do I Submit A (Good) Bug Report?

Bugs are tracked as [GitHub issues using the Bug Report template](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=bug_report.md&title=). Create an issue on that and provide the information suggested in the bug report issue template.

### Suggesting Enhancements

This section guides you through submitting an enhancement suggestion, including completely new features, tools, and minor improvements to existing functionality. Following these guidelines helps maintainers and the community understand your suggestion ✏️ and find related suggestions 🔎

#### How Do I Submit A (Good) Enhancement Suggestion?

Enhancement suggestions are tracked as [GitHub issues using the Feature Request template](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=feature_request.md&title=). Create an issue and provide the information suggested in the feature requests or user story issue template.

#### How Do I Submit A (Good) Improvement Item?

Improvements to existing functionality are tracked as [GitHub issues using the User Story template](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=user_story.md&title=). Create an issue and provide the information suggested in the feature requests or user story issue template.

## Development

### Set up your dev environment

The following tools are required:

- [git](https://git-scm.com)
- [python](https://www.python.org) (v3.9+)
- [pip](https://pypi.org/project/pip/) (v23.0+)
- [expect](https://core.tcl-lang.org/expect/index) (for functional tests)

You can setup your dev environment using [tox](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/), an environment orchestrator which allows for setting up environments for and invoking builds, unit tests, formatting, linting, etc. Install tox with:

```shell
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
```

Install project requirements with:

```shell
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

If you want to test the `cli` binary, you can install `cli` and all dependencies with:

```shell
pip install .
```

### Testing

Before pushing changes to GitHub, you need to run the tests as shown below. They can be run individually as shown in each sub-section
or can be run with the one command:

```shell
tox
```

#### Unit tests

Unit tests are enforced by the CI system. When making changes, run the tests before pushing the changes to avoid CI issues.

Running unit tests can be done with:

```shell
tox -e unit
```

#### Functional tests

Functional tests are enforced by the CI system. When making changes, run the tests before pushing the changes to avoid CI issues.

Running functional tests can be done with:

```shell
tox -e functional
```

#### Coding style

Cli follows the python [pep8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/) coding style. The coding style is enforced by the CI system, and your PR will fail until the style has been applied correctly.

We use [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) to enforce coding style using [black](https://github.com/psf/black), and [isort](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/).

You can invoke formatting with:

```shell
tox -e fmt
```

In addition, we use [pylint](https://www.pylint.org) to perform static code analysis of the code.

You can invoke the linting with the following command

```shell
tox -e lint
```

## Your First Code Contribution

Unsure where to begin contributing? You can start by looking through these issues:

- Issues with the [`good first issue` label](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22) - these should only require a few lines of code and are good targets if you're just starting contributing.
- Issues with the [`help wanted` label](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22help+wanted%22) - these range from simple to more complex, but are generally things we want but can't get to in a short time frame.

Commit message:

fix link to coc and report direct to community maintainer list (#596)
Signed-off-by: Mike Brown <brownwm@us.ibm.com>

CONTRIBUTING/CONTRIBUTING.md, after:

# Contributing

👍🎉 First off, thank you for taking the time to contribute! 🎉👍

The following is a set of guidelines for contributing. These are just guidelines, not rules. Use your best judgment, and feel free to propose changes to this document in a pull request. Please read the [community contribution guide](https://github.com/instruct-lab/community/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md) first for general practices for the InstructLab 🥼 community.

## What Should I Know Before I Get Started?

### Code of Conduct

This project adheres to the [InstructLab/cli - Code of Conduct and Covenant](../CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). By participating, you are expected to uphold this code.

### How Do I Start Contributing?

The below workflow is designed to help you begin your first contribution journey. It will guide you through creating and picking up issues, working through them, having your work reviewed, and then merging.

Help on open source projects is always welcome and there is always something that can be improved. For example, documentation (like the text you are reading now) can always use improvement, code can always be clarified, variables or functions can always be renamed or commented on, and there is always a need for more test coverage. If you see something that you think should be fixed, take ownership! Here is how you get started:

## How Can I Contribute?

When contributing, it's useful to start by looking at [issues](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues). After picking up an issue, writing code, or updating a document, make a pull request and your work will be reviewed and merged. If you're adding a new feature or find a bug, it's best to [write an issue](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=feature_request.md&title=) first to discuss it with maintainers.

To contribute to this repo, you'll use the Fork and Pull model common in many open source repositories. For details on this process, check out [The GitHub Workflow
Guide](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/guide/github-workflow.md)
from Kubernetes.

When your contribution is ready, you can create a pull request. Pull requests are often referred to as "PR". In general, we follow the standard [GitHub pull request](https://help.github.com/en/articles/about-pull-requests) process. Follow the template to provide details about your pull request to the maintainers.

Before sending pull requests, make sure your changes pass formatting, linting and unit tests.

#### Code Review

Once you've [created a pull request](#how-can-i-contribute), maintainers will review your code and may make suggestions to fix before merging. It will be easier for your pull request to receive reviews if you consider the criteria the reviewers follow while working. Remember to:

- Run tests locally and ensure they pass
- Follow the project coding conventions
- Write detailed commit messages
- Break large changes into a logical series of smaller patches, which are easy to understand individually and combine to solve a broader issue

### Reporting Bugs

This section guides you through submitting a bug report. Following these guidelines helps maintainers and the community understand your report ✏️, reproduce the behavior 💻, and find related reports 🔎.

#### How Do I Submit A (Good) Bug Report?

Bugs are tracked as [GitHub issues using the Bug Report template](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=bug_report.md&title=). Create an issue on that and provide the information suggested in the bug report issue template.

### Suggesting Enhancements

This section guides you through submitting an enhancement suggestion, including completely new features, tools, and minor improvements to existing functionality. Following these guidelines helps maintainers and the community understand your suggestion ✏️ and find related suggestions 🔎

#### How Do I Submit A (Good) Enhancement Suggestion?

Enhancement suggestions are tracked as [GitHub issues using the Feature Request template](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=feature_request.md&title=). Create an issue and provide the information suggested in the feature requests or user story issue template.

#### How Do I Submit A (Good) Improvement Item?

Improvements to existing functionality are tracked as [GitHub issues using the User Story template](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues/new?assignees=&labels=&template=user_story.md&title=). Create an issue and provide the information suggested in the feature requests or user story issue template.

## Development

### Set up your dev environment

The following tools are required:

- [git](https://git-scm.com)
- [python](https://www.python.org) (v3.9+)
- [pip](https://pypi.org/project/pip/) (v23.0+)
- [expect](https://core.tcl-lang.org/expect/index) (for functional tests)

You can setup your dev environment using [tox](https://tox.wiki/en/latest/), an environment orchestrator which allows for setting up environments for and invoking builds, unit tests, formatting, linting, etc. Install tox with:

```shell
pip install -r requirements-dev.txt
```

Install project requirements with:

```shell
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

If you want to test the `cli` binary, you can install `cli` and all dependencies with:

```shell
pip install .
```

### Testing

Before pushing changes to GitHub, you need to run the tests as shown below. They can be run individually as shown in each sub-section
or can be run with the one command:

```shell
tox
```

#### Unit tests

Unit tests are enforced by the CI system. When making changes, run the tests before pushing the changes to avoid CI issues.

Running unit tests can be done with:

```shell
tox -e unit
```

#### Functional tests

Functional tests are enforced by the CI system. When making changes, run the tests before pushing the changes to avoid CI issues.

Running functional tests can be done with:

```shell
tox -e functional
```

#### Coding style

Cli follows the python [pep8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/) coding style. The coding style is enforced by the CI system, and your PR will fail until the style has been applied correctly.

We use [pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/) to enforce coding style using [black](https://github.com/psf/black), and [isort](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/).

You can invoke formatting with:

```shell
tox -e fmt
```

In addition, we use [pylint](https://www.pylint.org) to perform static code analysis of the code.

You can invoke the linting with the following command

```shell
tox -e lint
```

## Your First Code Contribution

Unsure where to begin contributing? You can start by looking through these issues:

- Issues with the [`good first issue` label](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22) - these should only require a few lines of code and are good targets if you're just starting contributing.
- Issues with the [`help wanted` label](https://github.com/instruct-lab/cli/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22help+wanted%22) - these range from simple to more complex, but are generally things we want but can't get to in a short time frame.
